---
title: "Characterization of the Stages of Creative Writing With Mobile EEG Using Generalized Partial Directed Coherence
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-12-7
excerpt: ''
date: 2020-12-07
venue: 'Frontiers in human neuroscience'
paperurl: ''
citation: 'Cruz-Garza, J. G., Sujatha Ravindran, A., Kopteva, A. E., Rivera Garza, C., & Contreras-Vidal, J. L. (2020). Characterization of the Stages of Creative Writing With Mobile EEG Using Generalized Partial Directed Coherence. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 14, 533.'
---

Two stages of the creative writing process were characterized through mobile scalp electroencephalography (EEG) in a 16-week creative writing workshop. Portable dry EEG systems (four channels: TP09, AF07, AF08, TP10) with synchronized head acceleration, video recordings, and journal entries, recorded mobile brain-body activity of Spanish heritage students. Each student's brain-body activity was recorded as they experienced spaces in Houston, Texas (“Preparation” stage), and while they worked on their creative texts (“Generation” stage). We used Generalized Partial Directed Coherence (gPDC) to compare the functional connectivity among both stages. There was a trend of higher gPDC in the Preparation stage from right temporo-parietal (TP10) to left anterior-frontal (AF07) brain scalp areas within 1–50 Hz, not reaching statistical significance. The opposite directionality was found for the Generation stage, with statistical significant differences (p < 0.05) restricted to the delta band (1–4 Hz). There was statistically higher gPDC observed for the inter-hemispheric connections AF07–AF08 in the delta and theta bands (1–8 Hz), and AF08 to TP09 in the alpha and beta (8–30 Hz) bands. The left anterior-frontal (AF07) recordings showed higher power localized to the gamma band (32–50 Hz) for the Generation stage. An ancillary analysis of Sample Entropy did not show significant difference. The information transfer from anterior-frontal to temporal-parietal areas of the scalp may reflect multisensory interpretation during the Preparation stage, while brain signals originating at temporal-parietal toward frontal locations during the Generation stage may reflect the final decision making process to translate the multisensory experience into a creative text.
[Download paper here](/files/Paper6.pdf)
